First off be warned...the myrian map is HUGE...I had to scan it in fairly
large to keep a decent quality to it...download/view it at your own risk.


Also note this is the northern half to the Myrian Ocean....if you would,
please refrain from planning any areas to the southeast of the ocean
unless  they are some sort of tropical islands just off the fringe...the
continent that is sorta my building playground is there with several
preplanned zones already mapped...

If you plan to venture farther south into the southern myrian ocean again
please only plan zones on the western & northern borders.  In my mind BTW
anyfarther to the southern then the extreme southern edge of the existing
southern myrian ocean is a glacier cap.



Another note, all the rooms are given basically in three digit numbers
which need to be added to 12400 to give the actual room numbers.  The
divsor lines give an idea of the current (which flows all towards the
center in one fashion or another.)  The red single line is a no-mob safe
path through the ocean which hops from island safe havens.


Small tropical island with volcanoes dot the souteastern border of the
northern myrian bordered by fog and storms to allow for small zones
there...believe Damescena already has a tropical island chain going in
there somewhere.  Also there is a dead end tunnel into one of the
volcanoes ripe for building.  Along the eastern edge is a bunch of fjoirds
(sp?) into the moutain range in which the drow dwell (the southern reaches
of them)  About mid way down the eastern edge the mountains dwindle into
the ocean and there is a dead end path through the fog....(maybe someday a
large body of water will lead around the easter edges of the GH continent
to amber...who knows...

The west is bordered by the lush jungles of the southern GH regions and is
ripe for any paths into the coastline for head hunters, amazons, etc.
Eventually about 2/3 the way down the land dwindlws away (supposedly the
start of a waterway which could eventually run all the way around to link
up to the bay of BM...or whatever that water is called...  

Somewhere along the farther southwestern boundaries there is a small
island which a person can just get onto and the description tells that the
island DOES continue to the southwest but a magically barrier of some type
will not allow passage there....again ripe for a zone ...magical of some
type..at one time I tought maybe the cirlce could have its actual location
there for a way other then portals...*shrug*



Also note the coral reef region which houses some sahgauin (sp?)
and water eleves...again ripe for any underwater tropical type
zones..maybe a sunken ship ripped open by the coral?


Anyways thats a quick overview.....



Mithros, Immortal Ranger of Sorrill
