<h> FAQ
-------------
_____________________________________________
  To read a chapter in this FAQ type:        |
      read chapter <Chapter Number> of faq   |
_____________________________________________|

Generic Newbie Questions:
1) What is a MUD?
2) What is <h>?
3) How do I play?
4) What is a MOB?
5) How do I tell the difference between a MOB and a PC?
6) What are all these acronyms?
7) What happens when I die?
8) How do I refer to something when there is more than one in the room?
9) How am I ever going to learn all these commands?
10) What's the best way to start?
11) Why is <h> so hard?
12) What is a client? (TinTin)
13) How fast do bugs and other things get fixed?
14) Automatic character deletion 

15-19) Intentionally left blank

Player Questions:
20) How come I can't pick something up?  (weight and volume)
21) I got attacked for no reason, what happened? (AI and brawling)
22) Where did my item go, I had it a minute ago?  (lighting and can be seen)
23) How do I remove something in the dark?
24) It won't let me move on the diagonals!?!   (TinTin and #speedwalk)
25) Some PC just robbed/killed me.  What can I do?  (PK and PL rules)
26) Ack, I lost all my goods, what's up with that?  (reimburse)
27) How do people seem to enter commands so fast? (abbreviations)
28) How come my stats aren't what I chose initially? (stat flux)
29) Why am I gaining 1 point of hp/mana/move every so often? (tasked regen)
30) What good is a spellbag? (spellbags)
31) Sometimes I cast, and I still have the component? (component charges)
32) What's with all these pieces of metal I keep finding?  (commodities)
33) Why is this mob asking me for some equipment?  (hunters)
34) What effect does my deities' potency have on me?  (potency)
35) How do I raise my deities' potency?
36) How do I raise my faction percentage?
What is a MUD?
--------------

MUD or (Multi-User Dungeon) is essentially a computerized fantasy-roleplaying
game.  What separates a MUD from other FRP's is the fact that it has multiple
actual people playing concurrently in the same universe.  You WILL meet a
wide multitude of other characters, each of whom is run by another human.
For the most part, they are probably very much like yourself.  Please do
realize that you are interacting with actual humans who have feelings and
intelligence.  Be careful how you roleplay your character for they may feel 
that roleplaying their own character means killing you.  The adage about
treating others as you want to be treated holds equally well for MUDders.
What's the best way to start?
-----------------------------

Chances are, the character you currently have will have to be redone.  I
say this because most new players realize sooner or later the choices they
made at the outset are not optimal for some reason or other.

The first order of business is learning what stats to set.  Read through
the help files on the classes (HELP CLASS) and races (HELP RACE).  Then
talk to people about what they chose and what problems they have.

If in doubt, a human warrior is a very easy class to fiddle around with
to get your feet wet.  The non-human races have a lot of complex rules
that go along with them (but some nice benefits too), while the other
classes have a multitude of skills which often confuse the beginner.
Why is <h> so hard?
-------------------------

You are not the only one to ask, believe me.  It was the opinion of the
implementors and gods that there was a slew of MUDs on the Internet that
had abandoned some of the core concepts of MUDs simply because they harmed
players (no rent, no game balance, out of control items).  The end result
of which was a re-markedly simple and easy mud where there was no feeling of
accomplishment.  If you can conquer it in a week, why bother?

<h> took the opposite course, hoping to attract serious players seeking a
challenge.  Game balance is something the implementors watch closely, and
no, we are not out to get the players, but we are out to offer them a 
challenge.  No, <h> is not for every MUDder, we have tried to keep
it "simple" in terms of ease of use, providing help and documenting changes,
but "challenging" in terms of actual difficulty in improving your character.
The god's opinion is that this strikes the proper balance between appealing
to the long time MUDder tired of CheeseDIKU and the new player trying to learn
the ropes.

We will not apologize for offering a challenge.  If it's too much for you,
we will gladly provide you a list of other muds you will find much easier
but we doubt as rewarding.
What is a Client?
-----------------

Clients are external programs that assist the player by handling tedious
chores for them.  They typically offer aliases (the ability to substitute
a pattern of keystrokes for a much longer series: eg: FOOD = get food bag,
eat food, burp), actions (the ability to automatically perform some
action when certain text is sent to the character: eg: "You are hungry" =
eat bread) and other features (substitutions, highlights, gagging and
ease of playing multiple characters from one terminal).

The implementors do recommend their use although they do require some
skill to use well and may just confuse the beginner.  UNIX users should
probably use TinTin++ available via anonymous FTP from:
   ftp.math.okstate.edu:/pub/muds/clients/UnixClients/
other systems (VMS, DOS, ...) available from:
   ftp.math.okstate.edu:/pub/mud/clients/
How fast do bugs and other things get fixed?
--------------------------------------------

This really depends on what it is.  The implementation team does read through
everything put into the BUG, IDEA and TYPO list, and we generally cull from
that a to-do list.  Obviously, the bigger the problem (as decided by the
imps), the higher priority it receives.  Also, simpler fixes generally get
solved faster than long-complicated ones that require hours of debugging.
This generally takes an average of a day or so from the time it was reported
unless the problem is long and involved in which case it may have to wait until
one of the coders decides they have free time and the inclination to fix 
said problem.
Automatic Character Deletion
----------------------------

<h> is rather space intensive easily requiring 70 MB of disk space
for all of the files and databases.  Obviously, we try to keep this size
in control, and one of the ways this is accomplished is by removing files
of inactive characters.

Additionally, since the <h> economy is driven by limited quantities of
equipment, it is not fair to have certain items tied up on inactive
players.

All of this requires the game maintainers to delete old characters in order
to conserve disk space and insure that items circulate.  We balance this
need with the desire of players to have their files be preserved for when
they want to play.  The following seems to be the fairest compromise:

At boottime, the mud will automatically examine how long it has been since the
character was last played.  A character is safe from deletion for level
number of days, or 1 week, whichever is more.  Hence a 4th level player has
7 days of inactivity before he will be deleted, while a 21st has 3 weeks.

Since a large number of users are from colleges, this auto deletion code
is automatically turned off between December 25th and January 15th (Christmas
Break) and between May 1st and September 15th (Summer break).
What is <h>?
------------------

<h> is a MUD similar in some ways to other muds on the Internet.  Our
original source was SillyMUD DIKU code, but with the release of version
4.1, all original code was put in place. Version 5.0 has added a number of new
structures including full color, a new skill system and tasked spellcasting.

<h> is written in C++ and utilizes object-oriented coding techniques.
It has roughly 30 megabytes of code, 8 megabytes of database related
information and 15 megabytes devoted to the player and rent files for the
1000+ characters.  In total, more than 15000 manhours have been devoted to
creating <h> by either the half dozen implementors or by one of the 80
or 90 builders we have had since to first <h> went public in June of
1992.  There are 215000 lines of code at present.

All rights to the <h> code reside with the <h> Implementation
Team.  At present, no version of <h> code is available to the public and
all contributions become the property of the <h> Implementation Team.

<h> remains committed to bringing the Internet the best possible mud
without charge.  It runs on a machine offered to us by the great folks at 
Stanford University.  <h>'s gods volunteer their time to improving the 
mud.
How come I can't pick something up?
-----------------------------------
(weight and volume)

Every object in the game is rated for two qualities.  Its weight (a function
of mass) and its volume (a function of size).

You must be able to both lift the object (sufficient strength for the weight)
and handle it (sufficient dexterity for the volume).  Failing either check
will prevent you from getting an item.

If something is too heavy, consider dropping something you are carrying that 
is heavy.  Remember that items worn or held do NOT contribute to carried
weight.  Hence, you can free up strength by putting items on otherwise, drop
something heavy.

If something is too bulky, free up volume by dropping something of large
size.  Alternatively, items get compressed when put into containers depending
on the material they are made from.  One note, having your hands tied up with
weapons, shields, etc lessens the amount of volume you can manipulate.  You
can sometimes solve volume problems simply by removing your weapon temporarily.
I got attacked for no reason, what happened?
--------------------------------------------
(Artificial Interactions and Brawls)

Implementor Batopr has taken upon the chore of making mobs behave more 
intelligently.  Mobs will react to insulting, aggressive or suspicious
behavior and often as a result will attack preemptively.  Obviously,
if someone puked on you intentionally, this would piss you off, likewise
with mobs.  To a limited degree, they have memories as well.  Just because
it doesn't attack you at the time you upset it doesn't mean that a few 
minutes later it won't decide you are some twit that needs to be taught a 
lesson.  This sort of AI code continues to get more complex, but is a 
leading cause of mobs becoming enraged and going on killing sprees, so
be warned.

Also, any given fight has the possibility of turning into a brawl unexpectedly.
Watching a fight between two creatures may result in the spectator suddenly
being caught up in the battle.  Likewise, fighting a given mob may cause
other creatures in the room to either jump in on one side or the other or
be caught up in it randomly.  Town and cityguards have the tendency to call for
assistance from a distance - be careful if taking on the cops.
Where did my item go, I had it a minute ago?
--------------------------------------------
(lighting and can be seen)

<h> attempts to simulate real world lighting conditions as
much as possible.  Since it can be confusing when what you know you
possess does not show up, here are some basic facts about lighting:
 
CBS: The can_be_seen value an item or creature has.  The higher the
number, the harder it is to see.  Hence small tiny items are difficult
to perceive, while bright, glowing objects are quite easy.  Obviously,
if a monster is actively hiding, it will have a high CBS.  And likewise,
having a rough idea of where something should be (inventory, equipment),
will reduce its CBS.
 
EYESIGHT: A value representing the alertness of the person looking.
It is partially made up of how good their vision is and is adjusted for
various spells or racial modifiers.
 
LIGHTING: A number representing how illuminated the room is.  Any and all
light sources contribute to the lighting in a room.  A bright sunny day
yields quite a bit of lighting, while torches and lanterns add even more.
Obviously, the interior of a building with no windows or light sources would
be quite dark.  Weather (cloud cover, precipitation) also plays a role in
lighting, and a full moon will yield a tiny amount of light.
 
Provided that LIGHTING + EYESIGHT >= CBS, the item will be visible.
----------------------
Some exceptions to this rule are of course necessary.  Obviously being
blind, you would be unable to see anything.  Additionally, a glowing
or illuminated creature or item is immediately apparent regardless of
the lighting conditions.

Chances are, if something you know you possess is not visible, than the
amount needed to see the object.  This is especially true in the wilderness
or after dark where the lighting is dim at best.  Find somewhere nice and
brightly lit like a shop and look again.

The other possibility is that there is a thief in your midst going on
a stealing spree.  You are left on your own to find and handle such a person.
How do I remove something in the dark?
--------------------------------------

While you do need to be able to see an object on your body in order to
remove it by name: "remove glove", "remove sword", you are able to
remove whatever it is you are wearing on your "hand" simply because you
know where your hand is.  Logical, no?

To do this though, use the following syntax:
remove (slot-name)

eg:
remove head
remove waist
remove hand-left        <-- for gloves
remove leg-right
remove hold-right       <-- for weapons/shields

You should be able to remove some weapon, then hold your lantern and light it.
This will hopefully make it no longer dark.
It won't let me move on the diagonals!?!
----------------------------------------
(TinTin and #speedwalk)

A common complaint typically traced to people using a client.  Standard
DIKU's do not have the northeast, southeast, southwest, northwest directions,
hence many clients interpret "ne" as "go north then go east".  This causes
problems on <h> if you mean "ne" as "go northeast".

Under TinTin, you can disable the problem feature by typing
#speedwalk
and turning it OFF.
Alternatively, some people prefer to leave speedwalk on and walk on
the diagonals by using "Ne", "nE" or "NE", etc.

You should probably consult the help files that are with your client if
this doesn't solve the problem.
Some PC just robbed/killed me.  What can I do?
----------------------------------------------
(player killing, and player looting)

<h> has tried various methods of dealing with these two problems in
the past.  The current rules can be found in the newbie guide.

We encourage players to handle their own affairs without the intervention
of a god.  The exception to this rule is where a newbie (level 1-5) is
concerned.  Newbies are HANDS OFF without the explicit ok of a god to
deal with them.  This is so characters who are learning the rules are
not turned off by some quick-to-retaliate player.  In the case where a
newbie is on just causing havoc, gods will generally authorize their killing
BUT you do need to get that authorization or face penalty.

If the players are both over level 5, gods won't interfere except in extreme
cases.  
Ack, I lost all my goods, what's up with that?
----------------------------------------------

Refer to HELP REIMBURSE for starters.  In general, dying just before the
game crashed or rebooted is not a valid reason to get a reimbursement
since the game will save your corpse in the same room it was in before the
crash.. If the game did not crash and you didn't die, then HELP LOSING LINK
probably explains why you have no equipment.

In any case, for item reimbursement questions,  you will need a 54+ level
god. WHO -GL to see who's on.

The other obvious alternative is that you couldn't afford your rent and
the rent contingencies as detailed in HELP RENT occurred.
How Do People Seem To Type So Fast?
-----------------------------------
(abbreviations)

Without question, mudding improves your typing speed.  But more likely,
they are only appearing to type faster because they are using fewer keystrokes.

<h> utilizes a complex 'string completion' scheme so that instead of
typing "look at the bird", you can probably get away with "l bird" or
"l b".  You will want to learn the shortest form of certain often used
verbs like consider (con), kill (k), look (l), etc...

Do use some caution though, the mud can misinterpret your meaning fairly
easily with abbreviations.  KICK DEM may hit the nasty slobbering DEMon
about to tear you limb from limb or hit DEMocles who you are grouped with.
How come my stats aren't what I chose initially?
------------------------------------------------
(stat flux)

This question is commonly asked by players after they view their stats with the
ATTRIBUTE command.  The short answer to this question is that they are.  The
real answer is that the stats you set initially are used as a baseline.  
However, a slight variation from this baseline is implemented based on the
player's age.  For instance, a younger PC will have increased strength and
karma, but lower intelligence and wisdom, while more elderly PC's essentially
have the reverse of this.
Why am I gaining 1 point of hp/mana/move every so often?
--------------------------------------------------------
(tasked regeneration)

On <h>, the actions of sitting, resting or sleeping are handled as
tasks for purposes of increasing the regeneration rates.  The tick-time
regeneration rate is independent of position (ie, you get a flat amount
at tick time).  However, if you rest for a set amount of time, then you
are awarded 1 point of mana/move and hp.  The time between these regenerative
pulses is different for the various positions.  Sleeping will restore you
very quickly, while sitting is less slow.

This method was instituted as one of the favorite tricks of clients is to
keep track of when the regenerative pulses would occur.  If they could be
sleeping at exactly the right second, it would treat them as if they had
been sleeping for the entire tick.  Under tasked regeneration rules, this
trick no longer exists.  Plus, it means you need not rest the entire tick
if all you need is 1 or 2 hit points.
How Do I Play?
--------------

The best way to learn to play is by actually playing.  Trial and error
remains an essential learning technique on any MUD.  There are ways to get
tips and clues as well as basic knowledge and how to utilize it.  The
largest source of clues available is the index of help files.  HELP
will list the general categories within the index, and the HELP
command in general is quite useful.  Other sources of information you
should acquaint yourself with are the Newbie Guide, this FAQ, the
NEWS (version addendum) and the board.  Please refer to the Newbie
Guide on Getting Help for more details on these.
What good is a spellbag?
------------------------
(spellbags)

Spellbags are special magical containers for components.  Since they cannot
be used to hold regular (non-components) items, they are often thought of as
being of little use.  However, they have two useful qualities.

First, they protect components from decay.  Some components go bad over time,
but the interior of a spellbag is magically shielded from the ravages of time.

Secondly, they are magically attuned to the forces of thaumaturgy.  Thus, if
a spell calls for you to hold a component in your secondary hand, you could
either keep all the components separate, attempt to remember which one you need
for a given spell and grab it at the proper time (in the thick of battle?), 
or... throw all your components in a spellbag, and when you are ready to cast
a given spell, merely grab the spellbag.  The spell will find the component
it needs within the spellbag and utilize it properly.
Sometimes I cast, and I still have the component when I am all done?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Components have a number of uses (or charges).  Each casting of a spell
will use up one charge, when all charges are used up, the component is
typically discarded automatically.  However, if the component started
with more than one charge when the spell was cast, it will still be in
existence (minus one charge).  To view the charges a given component has,
merely look at it.
What's with all these pieces of metal I keep finding?
-----------------------------------------------------

The various creatures of <h> are no longer restricted purely to
using and owning talens to reflect their personal wealth.  Various commodities
have been obtained by some of them and you may soon find them for yourself as
you explore.

These commodities are considered raw materials and have little worth by 
themselves.  No shopkeeper will accept them as currency.  But, they do have 
value to certain peoples as they are useful commodities.  The raw materials are
used in certain spells and skills as well as by the repair shops.  As such, a 
commodities market has been created to trade specifically in these materials.  
You can sell the metals that you obtain, or buy what the markets have for sale 
for your own purposes.

As you might expect, the better and more expensive metals are harder to come by
and additionally certain creatures have a greater likelihood of having certain
metals than others.
Why is this mob asking me for some piece of my equipment?
---------------------------------------------------------

<h> has a special feature in which mobs will, from time to time,
attempt to "re-possess" an item which once belonged to them.  Such creatures
are affectionately referred to as hunters.  This is a semi-random function
triggered automatically when certain conditions have been met and was 
instituted to insure a fair and equitable turnover of equipment should some
high powered item fall into a newbies hands.  If you are powerful enough, just
re-kill the creature, otherwise, be creative and try to escape.
What affect does my deities' potency have?
------------------------------------------

Your deities' potency represents the status of your faction in relation to
the other factions, as well as how powerful your deities are compared to
other faction's deities.  While it may seem like a trivial thing, it actually
can have profound effects on the members of the faction.

For instance, a potent faction will permit that faction's clerics to regenerate
piety at an accelerated rate.  Additionally, interventions (fate rescuing from
nasty effects) increase.

It is a foolhardy faction that allows their potency to drop too low.
How do I increase my deities' potency?
---------------------------------------

Your deities' potency is related to the performance of all members of 
that faction.  For instance, as you do well (killing the enemies of the faction
and aiding your allies), you not only raise your faction percentage, but also
raise your deities potency.  Similarly, potency will drop if you allow your
faction percentage to drop.  Realize though, faction percentage is specific
to you, while all members of a faction contribute to the potency.

Potency is drained somewhat each time the deity interferes in the mortal
realms.  The most common way this happens is in the regeneration of piety
to that faction's clerics, but Miracles and the like also have their effect
on potency.
How do I raise my faction percentage?
-------------------------------------

In general, this is done by aiding your faction's allies and harming your 
faction's enemies.  The faction percentage is actually derived from how
you have been behaving toward each of the other factions individually.
While attacking the other enemy factions is a rather simple task for most
adventurers, realize that unless you ALSO ASSIST your allies, your percentage
will never rise very high.

If you are in an organized faction, then you will no doubt be instructed by
some superior as to which factions are considered an ally and which are
enemies.

The unaffiliated faction is committed to keeping the other factions in check.
As such, its only allies are other unaffiliated, while all other factions
are considered enemy.  Realize that attacking only one of the other factions
(ignoring the others) will not raise you as fast as attacking them each 
equally.  And remember to assist other unaffiliateds whenever possible.
What is a MOB?
--------------

MOB is short for a "mobile".  Mobiles are everything in the game not another
human being that moves.  In other words, mobs are all the monsters and 
creatures of the <h> world.

In general, you will want to seek out mobs and kill them in order to achieve 
fame and fortune. Obviously there are smart and stupid ways to go about
seeking and killing mobs.  For instance, fighting using a weapon as opposed
to your bare hands is one of the obvious ones.  Learning these tricks is
what the game is all about.

Not all mobs are bad.  Some will teach you skills or spells that will help
you against other mobs.  Others may sell you useful items, and still others
may grant favors or wishes.  Deciding what mobs are beneficial, what mobs are
to be killed and what mobs are just to fulfill needed jobs (like janitors)
is another important skill.
How do I tell the difference between a MOB and a PC?
----------------------------------------------------

You are a PC (player character), anything not a PC is a mob.  Like you,
the other PC's are trying to kill mobs, earn treasure and obtain fame.
Sometimes your goal may coincide with other PC's and you may wish to
form a group to fulfill a common goal.

The mobs, on the other hand, are your opponents.  They will try and kill
you if you upset them to much.  They are controlled by the computer 99%
of the time, but may be overtaken at any time by one of the gods in order
to make the game more interesting.

The simplest way to tell the difference is to look at the name.  PC's are
limited to one word names, whereas mobs often have names like "a cityguard"
although they may have proper names as well.  The second way to distinguish
is to see how they react to stimuli.  PC's will behave rationally and
sometimes even intelligently.  Mobs will react, although the functions
controlling their reactions are limited and repetitive.
What are all these abbreviations I keep seeing?
------------------------------------------------
(glossary)

afk - away from keyboard.  person stepped away from computer (bathroom, food...)
bbl - be back later.  disconnecting for indefinite amount of time
bm - Brightmoon, Town of  (sometimes abbreviated bmoon)
brb - be right back.  disconnecting for less then 5 mins usually.
brt - be right there.
char - character
kar - karma (sometimes mistakenly called charisma)
con - constitution, sometimes concentration
cs - center square of Grimhaven
dex - dexterity
eq - equipment.  stuff you can use (carry, wield, wear)
exp - experience points
fp - faction percent.  (sometimes abbreviated f%)
gh - Grimhaven, city of
hp - hit points
imp - an implementor of <h>.  The administrators or coders of the game
int - intelligence
lag - anything that slows down the game. shouted only by idiots
lol - laughs out loud
mob - mobile monster (see above)
mv - movement or endurance
MUD - multi user dungeon (see above)
newbie - an inexperienced MUDder or a low level character on a MUD
PC - player character (see above)
RL - real life.  Stuff done between mudding sessions.
rotfl - rolling on the floor laughing.   various derivations exist
str - strength
ttfn - ta ta, for now
wis - wisdom
xp - experience points
:)  - smiley face on its side.  interpretation varies.  variations exist.
What Happens When I Die?
------------------------

If I knew this, I'd be a theology major.  :)   But seriously, in terms of
the mud, you "die" if your hit points goes to -11.  Below zero hp, you
will become unconscious, but there is still a slim chance of recovery if
aided in time.

Should you die, a certain amount of the xp you have earned will be removed
setting you back further from earning more fame.  Also, all the goods and
gold you were carrying around will be put onto your corpse.  You (the
now stark naked character) will be reincarnated and put in a central
location.  Also, there is a slim chance that your character will age a few
years.

Your goal will be to get your corpse back in order to get your items back.
You may need help in achieving this, for whatever killed you may just do
it again if you rush in naked.  Do remember how to get to wherever you
died, it doesn't pay to be stumbling around lost.  This task is often called
doing a "corpse retrieval".

Death does solve some problems.  Spell effects are removed, diseases go away,
limbs regenerate, and poison is cleansed from the body.  Also you are given
a hearty meal and a lot of water to quench any thirst.  Mobs that have a 
specific hatred to you will also forget; don't assume that a mob you have
enraged (by fighting, or otherwise) will automatically calm down though;
they merely stop actively hunting you.
How do I refer to something when there is more than one in the room?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

You will often see something like:
A hard roll is here. [2]

This denotes that there are 2 (number in brackets) of the item specified.
Similarly:
A barhopper wanders the streets.  [4]
implies 4 barhoppers are in the room with you.

The default reference is the first one in the room.  If you want to
reference the 2nd, 3rd, ... object, use this format:

(command) 2.(object)    <-- references the 2nd thing of type (object)
eg.
get 2.roll
kick 3.guard
buy 7.sword
How am I ever going to learn all these commands?
------------------------------------------------

Thats what the help files are for.  There are some 500+ commands available
but only about 25 are COMMONLY used.  Learn the important ones and worry
about the rest later on.  A complete list of all commands you are able to
use can be obtained by using the "command" command.  This list is not 
organized, but gives you an idea of the breadth of the possible capabilities.
