Homes:

Base prices:
In cities: 5 million per room
Outskirts: 4 million per room
Wilderness: 3 million per room

In GH, only the third floor of buildings can be used for homes, the
lower 2 floors are for commercial and other uses. The building that
the inn is in is reserved. I also try to pay attention to who owns
most of the building and not trample on property rights.

Special home features may cost extra (portals, fountains, etc) but I
haven't done anything special with that yet. A single mob with the
innkeeper proc is included in the price. ALL homes should have a
bedroom, unless there is a special reason not to (like vampires having
coffins in a basement, instead).

---
Shops:

Shops run from 3-5 million, depending on the type. In general, the
popular types are 5 mil (armor, weapons, clothing, potions) and it
goes down from there. It also depends on what is in the area - if we
have like 3 potion shops next door to each other and someone wants to
open a 4th, a stiff premium should probably be charged. I also
discourage combo shops (no clothing/armor shops etc). Scroll/potion
seems ok, and in the past I've done a few combo shops, but I'm trying
to avoid them entirely now. If you want two types, buy two shops.

There's a lot of leeway in shop pricing. I tend to charge rich folks
more money than poor folks, and in some cases I charge a premium for
good rooms (check out Frobozz's comp shop in GH, I think he paid like
9 million total for that?). The popularity of things change as well -
I used to not think much of potion shops, but not with Fedaykins
success I've mentally bumped them up to the 5 mil range.

---
Zones:

My theory with zones is that they should only cost whatever it takes
to convince someone to build one, unless there are specific benefits
that we would normally charge for. A standard zone that includes a
shop should only cost whatever the shop would cost (assuming the
city/person wants to own the shop).

---
Misc:

Code:

Single room, no frills:        1 million talens
Custom object, no frills:      100k talens each
Mob, simple response script:   150k talens each
Mob, simple/standard proc:     300k talens each
Mob, complex/important proc:   1.5-2 million talens each

Mob, guard/soldier:            level*level*100
(25% discount for standard city guard operations - city or nearby road patrol, guard stations etc)
(this charge is in addition to proc charges above)

Corporate assistant:           2 million talens
Trash collector:               300k talens
Greeter:                       150k talens




I don't charge for empty rooms to fill out buildings - if someone buys
a 3rd floor apartment in GH, I don't charge them for any non-existent
rooms below it, I just create them and put "Unfinished Shop" rooms
there.

In general, I stick to the 3-5 mil per room pricing for misc stuff.

