INITIAL WORK

Created: Saturday, 12 Nov 1994
Modified: -

Use command: READ CHAPTER (#) OF BUILDING where (#) is one of:

1.) Choosing Theme and Setting
2.) Initial Planning and Mapping
3.) Finalized Mapping and Integrating
4.) Fleshing It Out
5.) Starting to Build
Theme and Setting

The theme of the area is probably the single most important thing that is
chosen for an area.  Unfortunately it is also the first thing that must be
picked.  In general terms, the theme denotes the "look and feel" that
the area will have.  The only restriction is that it MUST fit into the
FRP (fantasy role-playing) genre that <h> uses.  (no spaceports,
no Nazi death camps, no crashed alien ships, no super-hero world, etc).

You should probably try and come up with something generic at first.
"I want to do a desert" is sufficient.  The theme has to be approved
by the Lord of Worlds both to insure that it will fit in and to let 
the LOW start thinking of how to integrate your zone with the mud.

Setting is basically some general ideas of things that will appear in the
zone.  For instance, "My desert will have a small oasis and part of it
will be a caravan route"  The setting should remain general at this stage.

Avoid the common pitfall of trying to cram too many ideas into one zone.
If you start thinking of your zone as being a "desert and an oasis" then
you should probably split the zone in half.  Do the desert first as its own
zone and hold off on the oasis for your second zone.  Yes, it limits you some,
but it also means that the zone you do do, is done completely and will probably
be done better.  Zones that try and cram everything in look sloppy and don't
get much respect or kudos from the people who play in them.
Planning and Mapping

After the area is approved, you can start setting up the actual layout of
the zone on graph paper.  The important things to consider when mapping is
that while it is VERY easy to just draw a box on the page, it takes about
30 minutes for each of those boxes to become actual rooms on the mud.  Keep
it under control by keeping it small, especially if this is your first zone.
No first-time builder should contemplate anything larger then 200 rooms.

You should probably start by making each room a box and draw lines connecting
each box/room to the other box/rooms to represent the exits.  Use pencil as
you will want to erase.  It is wise to design each setting separately and
then use the remaining rooms to connect your settings.  In our desert example
I might use 14 rooms to represent the oasis, 24 rooms lined up as a road/trail
for the caravan route and the remaining rooms set up mish-mash to represent the
trackless desert surrounding the area.

Remember to mark the door/gate exits somehow.  Also note any rooms that are
out of the ordinary like air rooms, rivers, ocean, etc.

Lastly, number your rooms in some logical fashion.  Left to right, top to
bottom across the page your map is on is best.  These room numbers are used
primarily by you, so make sure you don't confuse yourself later on.
Finalized mapping, and integration

Once your map is done, copy it onto a brand new sheet of paper using pen this
time.  This is done so that you have a neat copy to work from while actually 
building.

Count the number of rooms you used, as the LOW will want to know how many to
allocate to you.  Zones are allocated in blocks of 100 rooms.  If you tell
him you want 201 rooms, he has the right and duty to slap you silly.  Also,
a wise builder will set it up so that they have 5-10 extra rooms.  As you
actually make your zone, you will realize that you need a room here and there
and these unassigned rooms can be used then.

At this stage, you should also start worrying about where your area will
link up with the existing mud.  You will want to design one or two rooms
and dedicate them as "connectors".  A connector is the room that will 
ultimately link your zone to the real mud.  The description of the connector
should be such that it serves to blend your area in.  ie. if you are linking
your desert to a spot where there are hills now, you need to use a few rooms
so that the hills gradually disappear and a desert begins.

The sign of a good builder is that they also leave space in their zone for
connections to future zones.  Such rooms in the meantime would be like:
A Cave-In Blocks the Tunnel, A Long Road Northward, An Overgrown Path, etc.
They would have descriptions indicating that the way forward wasn't passable
as of yet, but might open later on (pending someone designing an attachment).
Fleshing it out

It probably takes about an hour to do all of this so far.  At this point you
should start thinking about the details that will have to be added.  For
instance, you should explore the regions AROUND where your zone will attach
so that you can mesh the descriptions and can indicate what is visible in
that direction for your descriptions.  Be careful about names of landmarks
so that you spell things consistently - it doesn't pay to have the same
mountain range called different names.

You should also begin thinking about the populace in your area.  You don't
need to get specific yet, and it is best to put off definite planning until
AFTER you have FINISHED building The World portion.  But, you can start 
planning generic ideas of what will be needed.  Do you need humanoids?
animals? mythical creatures?  It's most certainly not worth worrying about
objects until much later though.
Starting Building

Read the book on how to run the REDITer and talk to the LOW about any
questions.  Get your zone allocated and know how to use the editors as well as
save and you are all set to build.

As you build each room, keep a piece of paper in hand and jot down ideas
for mobs and objs you have as you go.  Remember that the description of the
room should NOT contain description of creatures or items in it, so you
will want to make a note of things you have to build later so that you
remember.

Three final notes
Don't get cocky, most of this can be done in the first night whereas it will
probably take you two months to do all the dirty work.

Get ideas from others.  The LOW and other gods who have finished zones may
know tricks on how to do something easier.  Almost anybody can give you 
critiques or other ideas of things you may want to put in.

Lastly, have fun with it.  Every one of us is mudding to escape from work,
so if it seems like work, put it aside and go do something else.
