MOB FILE CREATION

Created: Wednesday, 30 March 1994
Modified: Monday, 30 June 1997

MEDIT is the online monster editor for creating new mobs for use in
the <h> world.  HELP MEDIT exists but may be poorly written or
out of date.

Use command: READ CHAPTER (#) OF MOB where (#) is one of:
 1) Name                         2) Short Description
 3) Long Description             4) Description
 5) Action flags                 6) Affect flags
 7) Alignment                    8) Number of attacks
 9) Level                       10) Hitroll
11) Armor Class                 12) Hit point bonus
13) Bare hand damage            14) Gold carried
15) Exp Bonus                   16) Race
17) Sex                         18) Resistances
19) Default Position            20) Susceptibilities
21) Immunities                  22) Skin type
23) Class                       24) Stats
25) Height                      26) Weight
27) Special Procedure           28) Vision Bonus
29) Can be seen                 30) Mobile sounds
31) Scripts
     32) EXP DETERMINATION - optional
     33) TIPS ON SETTING STATS
     34) Help for Resistance, Immunity, Susceptibility
     35) BUILDING POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
Name

This is probably THE most confusing field on monsters so please be sure you
read carefully in order for things to work properly.

The name field is used internally in order to reference the creature.  This
means that if you type "hit balrog", it looks for a match of "balrog" in the
creature's name field.  However, the text shown (external use) comes from the
short description (see below).

The name field should be a space separated list of keywords for the mob.
DO NOT include words like "a", "an", "the", "of" etc.
DO NOT add punctuation.  Drop any quote marks, dashes, etc.
DO NOT capitalize any word, except proper names.
DO NOT include words that are abbreviations of other keywords already listed.
If the mob is "the merchant's wife", its name should be "wife merchants" ("the"
should be dropped, and "merchant" is an abbreviation of merchants).

Additionally, the first keyword is sometimes used externally.  It is
important that the first keyword identify the creature from those that will
be around it to avoid player confusion.  For instance, if I am making elves,
I would make "wife elven elf", "male elven elf", "husband elven elf", etc.
(note that "elf" is not an abbreviation of "elven", so is necessary in this
case).  In such situations, "wife", "male" and "husband" will be shown which
is clearer than "elf", "elf" and "elf" if I had chosen some other order.
Hitroll

The mobs tohit bonus.  It is generally set to be level/10
Armor class

The mobs armor rating from +100 to -100
Hit point bonus

A mob is given hp_bonus + level d8 hit points.
bare hand damage

This is the amount of damage the mob does when hitting.  It is entered in
the form XdY+Z.  That is, it will roll a die of size Y, X times and add to
it a number Z.  Or, it generates a number from X+Z to XY+Z.  The number 
represented by Z goes in the damage bonus field of the mob and will add 
to the damage of wielded weapons.

NOTES:

MOBS WITH WEAPONS: If you intend for the mob to wield weapons, you need to
insure that the mob does more damage with the weapon than with his hands or
he will junk the weapon as his hands would be better. Thus you must make
the roll low and the damage bonus high.  For example, 7d7+2 and 2d3+26 are
the same average bare hand damage of 30.  However, a mob with the first
barehand damage could only wield a weapon greater than 7d7 (not too
likely) while the second mob could wield one with a damage greater than
2d3.  Thus, if you wanted a mob to wield a weapon and have barehand
damage of 30 you would go with the 2d3+26. 

RELATION TO LEVEL:  The barehand damage and number of attacks is the 
primary determinant of a mobs level although the level is affected by a 
few other stat choices.
Gold carried

Not all mobs should carry gold, most animals should not.  The limits on gold
amount are that it must be less then K * level * level where K is

1.0 if the mob is in Grimhaven
2.0 if nearby to Grimhaven or other civilization
3.0 if far from civilization
4.0 if very remote and in an area very difficult to get to  (aggro, etc)

Under no circumstances can you give a mob more than 4 * level squared gold.

Adjust the level down substantially if the mob has equipment, treasure or
other booty.

NOTES:

ANIMALS:  You should not give an animal money, however you can load with 
other treasures and sell-able equipment.

CHECK YOUR LEVELS: Make sure your mobs' gold carried figures falls into the 
above ranges.
Exp bonus:

The determine XP formula looks at a ton of criteria, there is virtually no
reason this should be non-zero.

NOTES:

APPROVAL:  To set this number you need the consent of the LOW.
Race

Sets the creatures race.  Some races have special abilities (can be ridden,
water breath, fly naturally, infravision, etc)  Set appropriately.  If you
think a new race is needed, talk to Batopr.
Sex

Mobs gender.
Resistances

A resistant mob will suffer half as much damage as normal.

You must get approval from the LOW before setting a mob resistant to 
pierce, slash, blunt, non-magic or the various pluses
Default Position

This is the position the mob will load in.  It is also the mobs
preferred position, ie, it will stand/sit/rest etc if it can in order
to re-achieve this position.

The creature's long description is shown only if its position is the same
as its default position.
Short Description

The short description of the mob is the shortest display of text that will
be used to indicate the monster.  The short description is used in places like
"you hit (short description)"  "(short) slithers east."

Don't confuse this with the name field.  Name is used to refer to the mob,
short is used to display it.  eg
> hit (name)    <-- looks for a match in the name field
You hit (short) hard.  <-- displays short to tell player what was hit

Make sure the short description starts with a lower case letter.  The code
knows when to capitalize appropriately.

Do not capitalize the words in a short description.  The only words that should 
be capitalized are proper names and maybe some titles.  Also, don't put periods
at the end of the short description.

good shorts
Batopr, Lord of Worlds
a cityguard
the raccoon of doom
Susceptibility

A susceptible mob will suffer twice as much damage as normal.

You must get approval from the LOW before setting a mob susceptible to 
pierce, slash, blunt, non-magic or the various pluses
Immunities

An immune mob will suffer no damage

You ABSOLUTELY must get approval from the LOW before setting a mob immune to 
pierce, slash, blunt, non-magic or the various pluses
Skin Type

The skin types utilize the various material types.  These material types
are rated for susceptibility to slash, blunt, pierce style attacks so
it is important to set appropriately.
Class:

The mobs class.  The code gets incredibly confused if you attempt to make
a multi-class mob.  Please choose only 1.  Each class has a generic special
proc for it so that warrior mobs will kick/bash, etc and mages will cast.
Stats

Various stats the mob has.  At present, all mobs have an 18 charisma.
These do get used in various skills and spells, so avoid setting inaccurate
values.  Also avoid setting lots of 18's and 3's, try and keep them balanced.
Height

Height in inches.  Please read the note on item size and character height in
the OEDIT guide for a caveat.
Weight

Weight in pounds.
Special Procedure

Mobs are given the generic proc associated with their class automatically.
If you want something different, use those listed here.

Many of these are intended for specific mobs and should NOT be set willy-nilly.
Vision bonus:

Allows the mob to see as if the light in the room was that much higher.
ie.  a vision bonus of 5 means it sees an extra 5 units of light in the room.
Can be Seen

This number is the minimum amount of light in the room required to see the mob.
Long Description

The mobs long description is what is shown when the mob is in its default
position.

It needs to be a complete sentence, starting with a capital letter and ending
with a period.  The standard is to have it fit on one line, although you
can certainly go over if need be, just make sure you allow for 80 character
screenwidths.

eg.
Batopr is here typing stupid documentation.
A large whale swims about here.
A giant eagle circles overhead.
Mobile sounds:

This can be used to send text to the room the mob is in and/or to send other
text to every room AROUND the room the mob is in.
Scripts

Russ hasn't gotten his lazy butt in gear and finished this yet.
How code figures exp:  (this is confusing, sorry)

hp modifier: # of hit points / 15.5    (double if sancted)
AC modifier: MAX(0, 60 - AC) / 2

barehand dam: XdY+Z
avg dam per hit:  (Y+1)/2  * X  + Z
avg dam per round:  avg_per_hit * number_of_attacks
dam_modifier: avg_dam_per_round * 1.1
  divide dam_modifier by MAX(1, 5 - level)    : only affects level 1-4 mobs
---------------
real_level = ((13 * dam_modifier) + (6 * hp_modifier) + armor_modifier) /20
real_level is RAISED TO A POWER based on class:
(warrior = 1.00,  thief = 1.04, monk = 1.02, ranger = 1.01
 Deikhan = 1.03, azruzi = 1.06, cleric = 1.09, magic-user = 1.11)

exp = real_level * real_level * MAX (20, real_level)

Then there's a whole slew of adjustments for tohit bonus, being aggressive,
immunities, resistances, susceptibilities and a bunch of other stuff.

See next page for some tips
These tips will work well as long as your mob is >= 5th level and is
a warrior-class mob.

step 1: pick the approximate level the mob should be
step 2: set the mob's class to warrior and the mobs level
step 3: set the AC as 60 - 2* level
step 4: set the barehand dam and num of attacks so that the average dam
        per round is    level/1.1
step 5: give it 11 * level hp as a bonus
  or
step 5: give it a sanct and 3.25 * level hp as a bonus

--------------
You can get a feel for the level your mob is by using the following formula:
if exp is less then 8000, its level should be:
    level = square_root (xp/20)
else
    level = cube_root (xp)
Resistance, Immunities, Susceptibilities

IMM_FIRE        1
IMM_COLD        2
IMM_ELEC        4
IMM_ENERGY      8
IMM_BLUNT      16
IMM_PIERCE     32
IMM_SLASH      64
IMM_ACID      128
IMM_POISON    256
IMM_DRAIN     512
IMM_SLEEP    1024
IMM_CHARM    2048
IMM_HOLD     4096
IMM_NONMAG   8192
IMM_PLUS1   16384
IMM_PLUS2   32768
IMM_PLUS3   65536
IMM_PLUS4  131072

Each of these fields uses what is called a bitvector.  In order to have
multiple resistances, you merely set the mob resistant to the sum of the
various resistances.  For example, to create a char this is immune to
fire (1), poison (256) and charm (2048), set immunity = 2305.  Likewise,
if susceptibility = 2305, the mob would be susceptible to fire, poison and
charm.

Note: The bit for NONMAG prevents a weapon that is not at least +1 tohit from
damaging, the PLUS1 bit prevents ONLY +1 tohit weapons from damaging, etc.
Description

A mobs description is what is displayed if you look at the mob.  Generally
it should be 3-4 lines long.  Avoid discussing what the mob is wearing.
If you feel its apparel is important, then make items to be worn by the mob.
Action flags

Tells the computer how the mob should behave.

CHANGED_STRINGS: causes the mob to refer to heap instead of global memory.
  Use caution when setting this, can mess up the entire mob index.
SENTINEL: mob won't wander.
SCAVENGER: Increases the mobs greed factor causing them to loot.
STAY_ZONE: mob won't wander outside your area.
WIMPY: mob will flee if hp falls below 1/6 of max.
AGGRESSIVE: Increases anger and malice factors resulting in mob attacking
  more often without provocation.
ANNOYING:  A mob set aggressive will attack an annoying mob.
PROTECTOR: Will protect (assist) in order 1. any protectee, 2. mobs of 
  same faction against players of different factions 3. same faction and
  race.  
PROTECTEE: Will get assist from 1. Protectors, 2. Any mobs of same
faction
Affect flags:

Basic affects the mob has.  Be advised that some races have affects set
automatically.  eg, ichthyoid(fish) has waterbreath, avian has fly.

Many of these have little affect on mobs - sense life, detects, etc. 
Alignment

A mobs alignment is a number from -1000 (pure evil) to +1000 (pure good)

-350 and +350 are the cutoffs for neutrality. 
Number of attacks

A floating point number.  (ie 3.5 or 2.2)
The number to the left of the decimal is the number of attacks it will get
guaranteed each round.  The number to the right is the chance of receiving an
additional attack.

eg. 1.4 is 1 guaranteed attack and a 40% chance of a 2nd.
Level

The is the mobs level.
